## Data Structures

### Compare an ArrayList to a HashMap. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each?

ArrayList is an implementation of the List interface while HashMap is an implementation of the Map interface. ArrayList is an ordered collection in which the user has control over where in the list the element is inserted. Elements in a list are accessed by their index. In contrast, a HashMap maps keys to values and the values are accessed by their corresponding key. Moreover, HashMap does not guarantee the order of its key-value pairs while ArrayList maintains insertion order of its elements. ArrayList allows for duplicate elements and allows for multiple null elements.  HashMap only allows for a single null key and permits null values. Performance-wise, HashMap provides constant time O(1) performance for retrieval and insertions. ArrayList performs in constant time, O(1), for accessing elements and in linear fashion, O(n), for searching, inserting, and deleting.


### Compare an ArrayList to a LinkedList. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each?

ArrayList and LinkedList are both implementations of the List interface. The two implementations differ in how they internally store elements. As a result, each has differing performance implications depending on the operation. ArrayList is implemented internally as an array while a LinkedList internally uses a doubly Linked List. ArrayList uses a structure based off indexes to store its elements allowing for constant time performance for retrieving elements. However, removals are more costly, as elements must be rearranged. In contrast, a LinkedList stores it's elements as nodes, containing the value of the element as well as references to the previous and next elements. This slows retrieval as you must traverse the list from the beginning or end. A LinkedList is more efficient when the access pattern is forwards and backwards from a a node, rather than accessed in complete random. Because LinkedList uses references, insertions and removals are in constant time as the elements do not need to be shifted, only the references to the previous and next elements need to be changed. It is  advantageous to use ArrayList when the application is expected to do more retrieval (e.g. random access) than insertions and deletions. Conversely, if more insertions and deletions are expected than retrievals, LinkedList is preferable. In terms of memory, the elements of an ArrayList will consume less, as each index only stores the value while in a LinkedList there is overhead as each node includes its value as well as references to the next and previous nodes.

### What is the difference between String and StringBuffer? When would you use a StringBuffer?

The difference between String and StringBuffer is that String objects are immutable and StringBuffer objects are mutable. That is, a String may not be modified after it is created. Because String is immutable, whenever string concatenation is performed, a new instance of String is created. Thus, StringBuffer offers performance benefits, namely speed and less consumption of memory, when performing a large amount of string concatenations.
